In the last section we successfully fetched album data from our API but we realized that there is a
big fundamental flaw in the timeline of our app related to the order in which we fetch data and show
content on screen by the time our data has been fetched all of our components have already appeared
on the screen which is keeping us from having any opportunity to show the data that we just fetched.
So it's an order of operations problem.
This section we'll figure out the best way for dealing with this issue.
That technique we'll use to solve this timeline issue is called component state state is how re-act
handles changing the content that is shown on the screen.
So let's look at a practical example of how this works.
This diagram shows the two possible states of our album list component.
It either has an empty list of albums so we get no no albums or show on the screen whatsoever and we
haven't fetched our data yet or we have some list of albums to show on the screen.
So maybe like an array of objects where each album has like a name or something like that.
The event that separates these two different states is fetching our data.
So we either have data or we do not in theory when we have not fetched our data we have kind of like
an empty state or a lack of any albums.
So this is just a little bit of the theory behind the term States.
Let's pivot a little bit now and talk about how a state works with react with re-act components will
have the same type of migration of state.
We will have this kind of empty list of albums and we will have a full list of albums to different possible
states that our component will be in in re-act any time that we change the state of our component our
component will automatically render itself to the mobile devices screen which is exactly the behavior
we are looking for.
So we are going to in this section walk through the process of enabling what is called component level
state inside of our album list component.
And the goal here is that we are going to use component level state to tell component.
Hey I just fetch a list of albums.
Here they are.
You need to rebrand yourself with this new list of data.
OK.
So fixing up our component it's going to take three steps.
Exactly three.
First we are going to set some default or initial state for our component.
Second when we fetch our data we are going to tell our component state to update.
And finally we will make sure that our component makes use of the state.
So it actually says like oh I've got this chemistry thing I'm going to tweak my render method to make
sure that I consume or make use of that state just to make sure that I'm really clear here when I use
this word state.
This is an actual system that is built in to react so does not dislike arbitrary or random word.
The components base of a class here has a bunch of functionality built into it that handles dealing
with this kind of state system that I'm referring to.
OK.
So three steps here.
Let's start with the first setting up some default or missile state for our component to set up some
default state.
We are going to add what is called a class level a property a class property looks like this.
We say just state equals empty object.
In the past I know how.
Let me take a quick aside here and say that this state declaration I just added with re-act has gone
through a lot of different iterations iterations on exactly how you declare a state or initialize it.
So you might be used to seeing other tutorials where it uses a constructor or other tutorials where
it uses a method called good initial state.
They're all doing essentially the same thing.
They're just saying hey this component when it gets created has some initial empty state or some like
initial Baystate whenever a component is created.
It will now have a property called this dot state and it will be set to an empty object and we refer
to this as our initial or empty state.
So by default we're saying that inside or component are a kind of like you know in the context of our
component we're going to have an empty list of albums when we first render a component.
So I'm going to say that I have eight albums peace of state and it should start off as an empty list.
So inside of my state object and say albums is an empty threat.
So I've now got an albums piece of state and it's an empty array to start off.
So when our component first renders it will have access to a variable that we can make reference to
inside of render right here as this stayed on albums.
And that's can return an empty array.
OK.
So that's it for Step number one.
We now have set up some reasonable default or kind of like initial state for a component.
Now for Step number two step number two we need to make sure that after we fed store data we take that
state and we update our components state.
So this step here is going to be just a little bit tricky.
All right.
Just a little bit tricky but we're going to write out the syntax for we're going right out the code
and then we'll talk about exactly what's going on with it.
So after I fetch my list of albums which is right in here this callback function right here I'm going
to delete the console log and I'm going to instead replace it with this dot set States.
I mean passing an object with the key of albums and a value of response data.
So first things first remember that when we looked at that request in Chrome we looked at the console
log the list of albums was available on the response as response to our data.
So that's exact That is why I'm using response to our data right here.
Second off we are passing an object to this function set state.
We are passing an object of albums pointing out the partial list of albums because I am updating my
albums piece of state.
So after I fetch my list of albums I'm no longer to have this state albums equal to an empty array.
I'm going to have this state albums equal to an array full of objects.
Finally you'll notice that I used a function here called this dot set state so set state is a function
that is automatically implemented for us by this component base class.
So we're not going to define set state.
We don't have to do anything like that.
It's just a function that already exists inside of any of our class based components.
The purpose of said State is to update our component state and say hey here is some new data for the
component we now need to read render this component with this new data that we have.
That's the entire purpose of set state right here.
One thing that I want to point out to you in particular is that using this set state method right here
is the only way in which we update our components state.
We will never ever say something like this Staat state equals albums blah blah you know whatever else.
We never ever say this but state equals anything.
We always modify or update our state by using this Dot said state and we'll talk about why that the
case of that is in the future and a little bit you will notice that we do kind of break that rule up
here where we say state equals blah blah.
The difference here is that this is for initializing not for modification.
So this is like the one time in which we do say state equals something something.
OK so the member the entire point of this is that we are using component level state to get access to
that list of albums and pre-rendered our component whenever we have successfully fetched them.
So I just cannot see what the result of adding the state code is to just going to figure out what's
going on here inside my render method.
I'm going to add in a console log of this state so I'm not going to say I've been lecturing long enough.
I'm not going to say anything else let's just say I'm going to shut up entirely if I can.
I will try.
Let's flip over a simulator.
We'll do our refresh and let's just let's see what happens.
Let's just see what happens.
So flip over to Crome wait for the consulate to pick up.
OK.
So here's my two logs.
I've got a console log of albums pointing at an empty array and then I've got a console log of albums
with five albums in this list right here.
So all right this looks interesting.
This means that our render method is occurring twice or is it.
Excuse me it's running twice which is definitely towards what we're getting at.
Let's take a quick break and review exactly what's going on here.